README.md, before:

# Bible Styler — Browser Edition (index.html)

Single‑file, zero‑dependency web app to “style” Bible verses using any OpenAI‑compatible Chat Completions API. This README covers only the `index.html` app.

- No build step, no server required
- Works with OpenAI‑compatible providers (OpenAI, OpenRouter, Groq, Together, Fireworks, DeepInfra, Cerebras, LM Studio, Ollama, etc.)
- Batch mode (many verses) and Single‑verse/chapter mode
- Settings and persona prompts saved locally in your browser (localStorage)
- Remembers last used mode (Batch vs. Single) and model/API settings

## Run It

Three easy options:

1) Use the hosted app (recommended)
- Open: https://helix4u.github.io/Bible-Styler/
- Because it’s HTTPS, browsers will block `http://localhost` API calls (mixed content). Use an HTTPS API endpoint (e.g., OpenAI, OpenRouter) when using the hosted page.

2) Open locally (file URL)
- Download or clone this repo
- Open `index.html` directly in a modern browser (Chrome/Edge/Firefox)

3) Serve locally over HTTP (best for local models like LM Studio or Ollama)
- From the folder with `index.html`, run a simple server, then visit `http://localhost:8000`:
  - Python: `python3 -m http.server 8000`
  - Node (serve): `npx serve . -l 8000`
- When the page is `http://`, calling `http://localhost:1234` (LM Studio) or `http://localhost:11434` (Ollama) works without mixed‑content issues.

Tip: You can also host it on your own GitHub Pages; in your repo go to Settings → Pages and enable Pages for the root. The URL will be `https://<user>.github.io/<repo>/index.html`.

## Quick Start

1. Vendor preset
- Pick a provider from “Vendor preset” to auto‑fill the API base URL (or choose “Custom” to paste your own)

2. API base and key
- `API base`: An OpenAI‑compatible chat completions endpoint (e.g., `https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions` or LM Studio/Ollama local endpoints)
- `API key`: Your provider key (stored only in this browser). For local servers like LM Studio or Ollama, you can usually leave this blank.

3. Model selection
- Click “Fetch” to load models from your provider, or toggle “type custom” and enter any model ID manually
- A minimal starter list is seeded on first load (now includes `gpt-4.1-mini`, `gpt-4.1-nano`)

4. Style system prompt (persona)
- Use a built‑in preset or write your own
- Built‑ins include: Stoner, Zoomer, House‑ish, Plain English, Kid‑Friendly, Headline, Legal Brief, Study Note, Clinical/Scientific, Minimalist, Tweet‑Length, Bold Bard, Pirate, Noir Detective, Sports Coach, Stoic Sage, Hacker Log
- Save/load up to 5 local persona slots

5. Load Scripture JSON
- Default: Bible KJV dataset (helix4u/Bible-Styler)
- Also available in presets: Tanakh (JPS 1917), Quran (English), LDS Standard Works, Bhagavad Gita sample
- Paste your own JSON URL or choose a local `.json` file
- Optionally filter by volumes/books, and set index range

## Data Sources

- Bible (KJV): Assembled from aruljohn/Bible-kjv (public domain KJV). Mirrored as `kjv_standard_works.json`.
  - Source: https://github.com/aruljohn/Bible-kjv
- Tanakh (JPS 1917 English): From Sefaria Export (public domain edition). Mirrored as `tanakh_standard_works.json`.
  - Source: https://github.com/Sefaria/Sefaria-Export (JPS 1917)
- Quran (English): Based on risan/quran-json (CC BY-SA 4.0). Reformatted into our schema as `quran_standard_works.json`.
  - Source: https://github.com/risan/quran-json (see LICENSE.txt)
- LDS Standard Works: Mirrored from johngthecreator/Book_of_Mormon_Scriptures `standard-works.json` as `lds_standard_works.json`.
  - Source: https://github.com/johngthecreator/Book_of_Mormon_Scriptures

Notes
- Where licenses apply (e.g., Quran CC BY-SA), attribution is included here and the original license terms apply to derivative JSON.

6. Run
- Batch mode: Click “Start” to process a range of verses; download results as `.txt`
- Single panel:
  - Single verse: Pick Book/Chapter/Verse (or type a custom line) and click “Run single verse”
  - Chapter: Select the Book/Chapter and click “Run chapter”
  - The original verse text shows as the textarea placeholder (not truncated)
 - Output controls: Use “Copy output” to copy all text, or “Share” to open the native share sheet (text‑only on mobile)

## Data Format (Scripture JSON)

Provide an array of objects with these keys:

- `volume_title` (string)
- `book_title` (string)
- `chapter_number` (number)
- `verse_number` (number)
- `scripture_text` (string)
- `verse_title` (string, optional; used for `[Book C:V]` prefix if present)

Example item:

```json
{
  "volume_title": "Old Testament",
  "book_title": "Genesis",
  "chapter_number": 1,
  "verse_number": 1,
  "scripture_text": "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.",
  "verse_title": "Genesis 1:1"
}
```

The UI also lets you filter by volume(s) and book(s) using comma‑separated lists.

## Providers and Endpoints

The app uses OpenAI‑style Chat Completions. Presets included:

- Custom
- LM Studio (local): `http://127.0.0.1:1234/v1/chat/completions`
- Ollama (OpenAI compat): `http://127.0.0.1:11434/v1/chat/completions`
- OpenAI: `https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions`
- OpenRouter: `https://openrouter.ai/api/v1/chat/completions`
- Together: `https://api.together.xyz/v1/chat/completions`
- Groq: `https://api.groq.com/openai/v1/chat/completions`
- Fireworks: `https://api.fireworks.ai/inference/v1/chat/completions`
- DeepInfra: `https://api.deepinfra.com/v1/openai/chat/completions`
- Cerebras: `https://api.cerebras.ai/v1/chat/completions`

Model list fetch is robust: it tries `/models`, `/v1/models`, and Ollama `/api/tags`. If model fetching fails, you can type a model ID manually. Your previously selected model is preserved if still available.

### Model Compatibility (Chat Completions)

- This page calls the Chat Completions API (`…/v1/chat/completions`) using `messages`.
- Not every fetched model will work: provider lists can include embeddings, image, or “responses‑only” models. Those will fail here.
- Choose models labeled “chat” or “instruct” (e.g., Llama‑3 Instruct, Qwen‑2.5‑Instruct, Mistral‑Instruct). If you see errors like “use the Responses API” or “unsupported endpoint,” switch to a model that supports Chat Completions.
- Some newer models may only support a Responses API; those are not compatible with this page unless the provider also supports Chat Completions for them.

## Local Inference (LM Studio)

- Recommended for privacy/cost: LM Studio — https://lmstudio.ai/
- Setup:
  - Install LM Studio, open the Local Server, and start it (default `http://127.0.0.1:1234`).
  - Download an “Instruct/Chat” model (e.g., Llama‑3 Instruct, Qwen‑2.5 Instruct, Mistral‑Instruct).
  - In this app, select Vendor preset → `LM Studio`. Leave `API key` blank. Click “Fetch” or type the model ID.
- Also works with Ollama (preset included). Pull an instruct/chat model for best results.

## Get an API Key (ELI5)

- What it is: A secret password that lets this page talk to an AI provider and bill usage to your account. Keep it private.
- How to get one:
  - Pick a provider (e.g., OpenAI, OpenRouter, Groq, Together, Fireworks).
  - Create an account, open the provider’s “API keys” page, click “Create new key,” then copy it.
  - Paste it into the app’s `API key` box. It’s stored only in your browser (`localStorage`).
- Cost: Some providers have free tiers; others require a card. Local options (LM Studio, Ollama) require no key.
- Some providers give daily free tokens up to a limit based on if you allow training on your data or not. 
- Quick links:
  - OpenAI: https://platform.openai.com/api-keys
  - OpenRouter: https://openrouter.ai/keys
  - Groq: https://console.groq.com/keys
  - Together: https://api.together.xyz/settings/api-keys
  - Fireworks: https://app.fireworks.ai/users/account/api-keys
 
Never commit or share your key. If you get 401/403 errors, recheck the key and that your account has access to the chosen model.

## Output Format

- Each line starts with `[Book Chapter:Verse]` (e.g., `[Genesis 1:1] …`)
- The app normalizes punctuation, removes noisy markers (e.g., `Reference:`), and ensures a minimum body length
- “Download .txt” saves all batch results locally
- “Copy output” copies the current Output pane
- “Share” uses the Web Share API (text‑only) when available; otherwise falls back to copying

## Options Explained

- Temperature: Creativity vs. determinism (0–2)
- Stream tokens: When true, uses SSE streaming; otherwise waits for full JSON response
- Stops: Comma‑separated stop strings sent as `stop` to the API
- Context pairs memory: How many recent (user, assistant) pairs to keep to reduce repetitive openings; may retry with higher temperature if repetition detected
- Extra headers: JSON object merged into the request headers (e.g., OpenRouter requires `HTTP-Referer` and `X-Title`)

## Privacy & Storage

- API keys and settings are stored only in your browser’s `localStorage`
- Nothing is sent anywhere except the JSON URL you fetch and the API endpoint you configure
- “Do not commit keys.” The page reminds you of this and never writes your key to the repo
 - Saves as you type; restores your last selections (including active tab: Batch vs Single)

## HTTPS, Localhost, and CORS

- Mixed content (hosted page): At `https://helix4u.github.io/Bible-Styler/`, browsers block `http://localhost…` calls. Use an HTTPS API endpoint, or run the page locally over `http://` to work with LM Studio/Ollama
- CORS: Your API and JSON host must allow cross‑origin requests from where you serve/open the page
- If model fetching fails due to CORS or auth, you can still type a model ID manually

## Mobile & Sharing

- Share button uses text‑only Web Share API on supported browsers (e.g., Chrome on Android)
- If sharing isn’t supported, the app falls back to copying the output to clipboard
- Very large outputs are trimmed to a safe length when sharing as text; for full content, use “Download .txt” or copy

## Troubleshooting

- “Failed …” when fetching models: Enter the model ID manually; confirm API base and key; check provider docs and CORS
- “HTTP 401/403”: Check your API key and account access to the model
- “Bad JSON file …”: Ensure the JSON is valid and matches the schema above
- Nothing happens on HTTPS with localhost API: Mixed content is blocked → switch to an HTTPS API or open the page over `http://`

## Notes

- Minimal seeded models are provided on first load to make the selector usable even before fetching (top: `gpt-4.1-mini`, then `gpt-4.1-nano`)
- The default Scripture URL may include multiple volumes; use the filters to narrow scope
- Mobile: UI is responsive; tabs are keyboard‑accessible (Enter/Space)
 - Output panel includes Copy and Share for quick mobile workflows

Enjoy! If this helps you, consider supporting: https://ko-fi.com/gille

## Study Aids (New)

Use the Study Aids panel to analyze or prep lessons from the currently selected passages. It reuses your existing API base/model/settings and returns a study result separate from the styled output.

- Presets:
  - Q&A (answer a question about the passage[s])
  - Sermon prep (big idea, points, applications, illustrations, questions)
  - Exegetical (verse-by-verse observations + structure)
  - Youth version (simple summary, questions, applications)
  - Academic commentary (concise, text-grounded notes)
  - Concise outline (title, outline bullets, short summary)
  - Cross-references digest (list with 1-line rationale)
- Scope: Current verse, Current chapter, or All styled output
- Context source: Styled + original, Styled only, or Original only
- Question box: Optional prompt for Q&A mode or to guide other presets
- Cross-references: Toggle to request brief related passages when relevant
- Actions: Run study, Copy study, Share (uses Web Share API; falls back to copy)

Tips
- Load Scripture JSON and optionally generate styled lines first; “All styled output” uses whatever is in the Output panel.
- For “Current verse/chapter,” the tool builds context from loaded JSON (original) and, if available, the Output panel (styled).
- Prompts are neutral and cross-cultural; they avoid tradition-specific claims and cite verses like `[Book C:V]`.
- Uses the same temperature/stream settings; adjust as needed for your provider.

Commit message:

Rename dataset files (tradition-appropriate); update presets and docs

README.md, after:

# Bible Styler — Browser Edition (index.html)

Single‑file, zero‑dependency web app to “style” Bible verses using any OpenAI‑compatible Chat Completions API. This README covers only the `index.html` app.

- No build step, no server required
- Works with OpenAI‑compatible providers (OpenAI, OpenRouter, Groq, Together, Fireworks, DeepInfra, Cerebras, LM Studio, Ollama, etc.)
- Batch mode (many verses) and Single‑verse/chapter mode
- Settings and persona prompts saved locally in your browser (localStorage)
- Remembers last used mode (Batch vs. Single) and model/API settings

## Run It

Three easy options:

1) Use the hosted app (recommended)
- Open: https://helix4u.github.io/Bible-Styler/
- Because it’s HTTPS, browsers will block `http://localhost` API calls (mixed content). Use an HTTPS API endpoint (e.g., OpenAI, OpenRouter) when using the hosted page.

2) Open locally (file URL)
- Download or clone this repo
- Open `index.html` directly in a modern browser (Chrome/Edge/Firefox)

3) Serve locally over HTTP (best for local models like LM Studio or Ollama)
- From the folder with `index.html`, run a simple server, then visit `http://localhost:8000`:
  - Python: `python3 -m http.server 8000`
  - Node (serve): `npx serve . -l 8000`
- When the page is `http://`, calling `http://localhost:1234` (LM Studio) or `http://localhost:11434` (Ollama) works without mixed‑content issues.

Tip: You can also host it on your own GitHub Pages; in your repo go to Settings → Pages and enable Pages for the root. The URL will be `https://<user>.github.io/<repo>/index.html`.

## Quick Start

1. Vendor preset
- Pick a provider from “Vendor preset” to auto‑fill the API base URL (or choose “Custom” to paste your own)

2. API base and key
- `API base`: An OpenAI‑compatible chat completions endpoint (e.g., `https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions` or LM Studio/Ollama local endpoints)
- `API key`: Your provider key (stored only in this browser). For local servers like LM Studio or Ollama, you can usually leave this blank.

3. Model selection
- Click “Fetch” to load models from your provider, or toggle “type custom” and enter any model ID manually
- A minimal starter list is seeded on first load (now includes `gpt-4.1-mini`, `gpt-4.1-nano`)

4. Style system prompt (persona)
- Use a built‑in preset or write your own
- Built‑ins include: Stoner, Zoomer, House‑ish, Plain English, Kid‑Friendly, Headline, Legal Brief, Study Note, Clinical/Scientific, Minimalist, Tweet‑Length, Bold Bard, Pirate, Noir Detective, Sports Coach, Stoic Sage, Hacker Log
- Save/load up to 5 local persona slots

5. Load Scripture JSON
- Default: Bible KJV dataset (helix4u/Bible-Styler)
- Also available in presets: Tanakh (JPS 1917), Quran (English), LDS Standard Works, Bhagavad Gita sample
- Paste your own JSON URL or choose a local `.json` file
- Optionally filter by volumes/books, and set index range

## Data Sources

- Bible (KJV): Assembled from aruljohn/Bible-kjv (public domain KJV). Mirrored as `bible_kjv.json`.
  - Source: https://github.com/aruljohn/Bible-kjv
- Tanakh (JPS 1917 English): From Sefaria Export (public domain edition). Mirrored as `tanakh_jps1917.json`.
  - Source: https://github.com/Sefaria/Sefaria-Export (JPS 1917)
- Quran (English): Based on risan/quran-json (CC BY-SA 4.0). Reformatted into our schema as `quran_en.json`.
  - Source: https://github.com/risan/quran-json (see LICENSE.txt)
- LDS Standard Works: Mirrored from johngthecreator/Book_of_Mormon_Scriptures `standard-works.json` as `lds_standard_works.json`.
  - Source: https://github.com/johngthecreator/Book_of_Mormon_Scriptures

Notes
- Where licenses apply (e.g., Quran CC BY-SA), attribution is included here and the original license terms apply to derivative JSON.

## Terminology

- “Standard Works” is a term specific to the Latter-day Saint (LDS) tradition. In this app, it is used only for the LDS collection (Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price). Other datasets are labeled by their own traditions: Bible (KJV), Tanakh (JPS 1917), Quran (English), Bhagavad Gita.

6. Run
- Batch mode: Click “Start” to process a range of verses; download results as `.txt`
- Single panel:
  - Single verse: Pick Book/Chapter/Verse (or type a custom line) and click “Run single verse”
  - Chapter: Select the Book/Chapter and click “Run chapter”
  - The original verse text shows as the textarea placeholder (not truncated)
 - Output controls: Use “Copy output” to copy all text, or “Share” to open the native share sheet (text‑only on mobile)

## Data Format (Scripture JSON)

Provide an array of objects with these keys:

- `volume_title` (string)
- `book_title` (string)
- `chapter_number` (number)
- `verse_number` (number)
- `scripture_text` (string)
- `verse_title` (string, optional; used for `[Book C:V]` prefix if present)

Example item:

```json
{
  "volume_title": "Old Testament",
  "book_title": "Genesis",
  "chapter_number": 1,
  "verse_number": 1,
  "scripture_text": "In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.",
  "verse_title": "Genesis 1:1"
}
```

The UI also lets you filter by volume(s) and book(s) using comma‑separated lists.

## Providers and Endpoints

The app uses OpenAI‑style Chat Completions. Presets included:

- Custom
- LM Studio (local): `http://127.0.0.1:1234/v1/chat/completions`
- Ollama (OpenAI compat): `http://127.0.0.1:11434/v1/chat/completions`
- OpenAI: `https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions`
- OpenRouter: `https://openrouter.ai/api/v1/chat/completions`
- Together: `https://api.together.xyz/v1/chat/completions`
- Groq: `https://api.groq.com/openai/v1/chat/completions`
- Fireworks: `https://api.fireworks.ai/inference/v1/chat/completions`
- DeepInfra: `https://api.deepinfra.com/v1/openai/chat/completions`
- Cerebras: `https://api.cerebras.ai/v1/chat/completions`

Model list fetch is robust: it tries `/models`, `/v1/models`, and Ollama `/api/tags`. If model fetching fails, you can type a model ID manually. Your previously selected model is preserved if still available.

### Model Compatibility (Chat Completions)

- This page calls the Chat Completions API (`…/v1/chat/completions`) using `messages`.
- Not every fetched model will work: provider lists can include embeddings, image, or “responses‑only” models. Those will fail here.
- Choose models labeled “chat” or “instruct” (e.g., Llama‑3 Instruct, Qwen‑2.5‑Instruct, Mistral‑Instruct). If you see errors like “use the Responses API” or “unsupported endpoint,” switch to a model that supports Chat Completions.
- Some newer models may only support a Responses API; those are not compatible with this page unless the provider also supports Chat Completions for them.

## Local Inference (LM Studio)

- Recommended for privacy/cost: LM Studio — https://lmstudio.ai/
- Setup:
  - Install LM Studio, open the Local Server, and start it (default `http://127.0.0.1:1234`).
  - Download an “Instruct/Chat” model (e.g., Llama‑3 Instruct, Qwen‑2.5 Instruct, Mistral‑Instruct).
  - In this app, select Vendor preset → `LM Studio`. Leave `API key` blank. Click “Fetch” or type the model ID.
- Also works with Ollama (preset included). Pull an instruct/chat model for best results.

## Get an API Key (ELI5)

- What it is: A secret password that lets this page talk to an AI provider and bill usage to your account. Keep it private.
- How to get one:
  - Pick a provider (e.g., OpenAI, OpenRouter, Groq, Together, Fireworks).
  - Create an account, open the provider’s “API keys” page, click “Create new key,” then copy it.
  - Paste it into the app’s `API key` box. It’s stored only in your browser (`localStorage`).
- Cost: Some providers have free tiers; others require a card. Local options (LM Studio, Ollama) require no key.
- Some providers give daily free tokens up to a limit based on if you allow training on your data or not. 
- Quick links:
  - OpenAI: https://platform.openai.com/api-keys
  - OpenRouter: https://openrouter.ai/keys
  - Groq: https://console.groq.com/keys
  - Together: https://api.together.xyz/settings/api-keys
  - Fireworks: https://app.fireworks.ai/users/account/api-keys
 
Never commit or share your key. If you get 401/403 errors, recheck the key and that your account has access to the chosen model.

## Output Format

- Each line starts with `[Book Chapter:Verse]` (e.g., `[Genesis 1:1] …`)
- The app normalizes punctuation, removes noisy markers (e.g., `Reference:`), and ensures a minimum body length
- “Download .txt” saves all batch results locally
- “Copy output” copies the current Output pane
- “Share” uses the Web Share API (text‑only) when available; otherwise falls back to copying

## Options Explained

- Temperature: Creativity vs. determinism (0–2)
- Stream tokens: When true, uses SSE streaming; otherwise waits for full JSON response
- Stops: Comma‑separated stop strings sent as `stop` to the API
- Context pairs memory: How many recent (user, assistant) pairs to keep to reduce repetitive openings; may retry with higher temperature if repetition detected
- Extra headers: JSON object merged into the request headers (e.g., OpenRouter requires `HTTP-Referer` and `X-Title`)

## Privacy & Storage

- API keys and settings are stored only in your browser’s `localStorage`
- Nothing is sent anywhere except the JSON URL you fetch and the API endpoint you configure
- “Do not commit keys.” The page reminds you of this and never writes your key to the repo
 - Saves as you type; restores your last selections (including active tab: Batch vs Single)

## HTTPS, Localhost, and CORS

- Mixed content (hosted page): At `https://helix4u.github.io/Bible-Styler/`, browsers block `http://localhost…` calls. Use an HTTPS API endpoint, or run the page locally over `http://` to work with LM Studio/Ollama
- CORS: Your API and JSON host must allow cross‑origin requests from where you serve/open the page
- If model fetching fails due to CORS or auth, you can still type a model ID manually

## Mobile & Sharing

- Share button uses text‑only Web Share API on supported browsers (e.g., Chrome on Android)
- If sharing isn’t supported, the app falls back to copying the output to clipboard
- Very large outputs are trimmed to a safe length when sharing as text; for full content, use “Download .txt” or copy

## Troubleshooting

- “Failed …” when fetching models: Enter the model ID manually; confirm API base and key; check provider docs and CORS
- “HTTP 401/403”: Check your API key and account access to the model
- “Bad JSON file …”: Ensure the JSON is valid and matches the schema above
- Nothing happens on HTTPS with localhost API: Mixed content is blocked → switch to an HTTPS API or open the page over `http://`

## Notes

- Minimal seeded models are provided on first load to make the selector usable even before fetching (top: `gpt-4.1-mini`, then `gpt-4.1-nano`)
- The default Scripture URL may include multiple volumes; use the filters to narrow scope
- Mobile: UI is responsive; tabs are keyboard‑accessible (Enter/Space)
 - Output panel includes Copy and Share for quick mobile workflows

Enjoy! If this helps you, consider supporting: https://ko-fi.com/gille

## Study Aids (New)

Use the Study Aids panel to analyze or prep lessons from the currently selected passages. It reuses your existing API base/model/settings and returns a study result separate from the styled output.

- Presets:
  - Q&A (answer a question about the passage[s])
  - Sermon prep (big idea, points, applications, illustrations, questions)
  - Exegetical (verse-by-verse observations + structure)
  - Youth version (simple summary, questions, applications)
  - Academic commentary (concise, text-grounded notes)
  - Concise outline (title, outline bullets, short summary)
  - Cross-references digest (list with 1-line rationale)
- Scope: Current verse, Current chapter, or All styled output
- Context source: Styled + original, Styled only, or Original only
- Question box: Optional prompt for Q&A mode or to guide other presets
- Cross-references: Toggle to request brief related passages when relevant
- Actions: Run study, Copy study, Share (uses Web Share API; falls back to copy)

Tips
- Load Scripture JSON and optionally generate styled lines first; “All styled output” uses whatever is in the Output panel.
- For “Current verse/chapter,” the tool builds context from loaded JSON (original) and, if available, the Output panel (styled).
- Prompts are neutral and cross-cultural; they avoid tradition-specific claims and cite verses like `[Book C:V]`.
- Uses the same temperature/stream settings; adjust as needed for your provider.
